Define requirements for v1 (#131)
kiagnose/kiagnose: docs/way_towards_v1.md

# Way towards v1

This document aims to define acceptance criteria that should guide redesign of
Kiagnose, driving it to v1.

The goal of the v1 release is to provide a solid core of the framework and
stable APIs. The goal is not to provide a feature rich tool.

## Personas

1. cluster-admin installing Kiagnose
2. Vendor writting a checkup
3. Cluster user running one or more checkups

## User requirements

> 1. Kiagnose is delivered through OLM and installed by the cluster administrator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. If the proposed solution will contain an operator, it is required to be delivered through OLM and installed by the cluster administrator.
```

# Way towards v1

This document aims to define acceptance criteria that should guide redesign of
Kiagnose, driving it to v1.

The goal of the v1 release is to provide a solid core of the framework and
stable APIs. The goal is not to provide a feature rich tool.

## Personas

1. cluster-admin installing Kiagnose
2. Vendor writting a checkup
3. Cluster user running one or more checkups

## User requirements

1. Kiagnose is delivered through OLM and installed by the cluster administrator.

> 2. Checkups need to run with the same or lesser rights as the user which

Reviewer 2: I do not quite understand who is the user, do you mean the cluster user that creates the checkups or the serviceAccount the checkup runs with?

Author: The person who starts a checkup execution. e.g. project-admin who wants to run the latency checkup in their namespace.

# Way towards v1

This document aims to define acceptance criteria that should guide redesign of
Kiagnose, driving it to v1.

The goal of the v1 release is to provide a solid core of the framework and
stable APIs. The goal is not to provide a feature rich tool.

## Personas

1. cluster-admin installing Kiagnose
2. Vendor writting a checkup
3. Cluster user running one or more checkups

## User requirements

1. Kiagnose is delivered through OLM and installed by the cluster administrator.

> 2. Checkups need to run with the same or lesser rights as the user which

Reviewer: I am not aware of a reference in the K8s API to the user or ServiceAccount which created an object.
Thus the next design of Kiagnose may not be able to address this requirement.
There may be a need for a certain operational policy to enforce it.

Author: I don't think we need that. Is not checking that the service account is present in the namespace sufficient to satisfy the requirement?

Reviewer: Lets assume a user does not have the permission to create a `Foo` object.
Lets also assume that there is a checkup which creates a `Foo` object as part of its normal operation.

If this user is privileges enough to execute this checkup (by creating a CRD or by other means) - I am not aware of a way for Kiagnose to check that this user has the same privileges as the checkup or more.

So my preliminary thoughts were to not grant this user the required permissions to execute the checkup in the first place.

Author: > Lets assume a user does not have the permission to create a `Foo` object. Lets also assume that there is a checkup which creates a `Foo` object as part of its normal operation.

And when the user triggers a checkup, they must pass the name of the service account that should be used for it.

> 
> If this user is privileges enough to execute this checkup (by creating a CRD or by other means) - I am not aware of a way for Kiagnose to check that this user has the same privileges as the checkup or more.

This service account must be in its namespace. Meaning:
1) Kiagnose can easily confirm whether it indeed is available
2) The user could use this service account through a Pod, even without Kiagnose, so we are not exceeding privileges that the user already has.

If checkups are bound to the same RBAC rules as the user is in its namespace, there is no way the checkup can do more than the user. No

> 
> So my preliminary thoughts were to not grant this user the required permissions to execute the checkup in the first place.

If they cannot gain (even though privilege escallation) a right to say create a Deployment, a checkup running in their namespace should not neither, right?

Not sure how this is affecting the requirement 2.

Reviewer: >This service account must be in its (users, checkups) namespace. Meaning:
>1. Kiagnose can easily confirm whether it indeed is available
>2. The user could use this service account through a Pod, even without Kiagnose, so we are not exceeding privileges that the user already has.

1. True, but how does it help?
2. I agree that a user could hijack a token of a ServiceAccount, but the requirement is to verify that a user has at least the privileges of the checkup. 

> If checkups are bound to the same RBAC rules as the user is in its namespace, there is no way the checkup can do more than the user.

A human user and a ServiceAccount could have different privileges in the same namespace.

From the [K8s docs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-service-account/):
```
When you (a human) access the cluster (for example, using kubectl), you are authenticated by the apiserver as a particular User Account (currently this is usually admin, unless your cluster administrator has customized your cluster). Processes in containers inside pods can also contact the apiserver. When they do, they are authenticated as a particular Service Account (for example, default).
```

Author: That's not a requirement. We don't have to verify their privileges (in sense that we have to read them and compare them), we just have to make sure they cannot escape the rules.

As you pointed out, hijacking of service account is already a part of Kubernetes: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/authorization/#privilege-escalation-via-pod-creation. We don't have to be holier than Kubernetes. We just must not make it worse.

Is relying on service accounts present in the namespace making it worse? If not then I believe that this requirement is satisfied. I have added a sub-point in the last commit speaking specifically about the privilege escalation.

Author: If I changed the line to "Checkups must not be able to gain higher rights than the user which triggered them. ", would it make more sense?

Reviewer: I understand what you are saying, but I still think the requirement's wording has to change.
As I've previously said, If a user has no permission to create `Foo` but the checkup has, it should be the responsibility of the admin to consider whether (or not) to grant this user a privilege to execute a checkup.
There is an implicit privilege escalation here.

Reviewer: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EJfYh-JVbJA

Author: I think that it should be the responsibility of the admin to consider whether (or not) to grant this user privileges **the checkup requires to run**.

That way checkup permissions are not a matter of concern for admin. The only thing the administrator cares about is which user can perform which operation in their namespace (or outside of it), and they express it through RBAC.

All the admin needs to do then is to grant a user a right to execute checkups (any checkup they may want to run). Depending on the permissions available to the user, a checkup may or may not be able to successfully finish.

Do you agree?

Author: I don't think we have to enforce anything, Kubernetes does that for us.

There is clearly a disconnect between us. Help me syncing by marking any lines bellow that are wrong:

Assumptions:

1. Any user able to run a Pod can gain privilege escalation through any of the service accounts in their namespace
2. Hence user can do anything them or any of the service accounts in their namespace was allowed to
3. User can create service accounts in their namespace
4. User can bind roles to service account, but these roles cannot exceed privileges of the user
5. User can run a Job with service account set to be one of those available in their namespace
6. Superprivileged kiagnose can create Jobs in any namespace in the cluster
7. These Jobs can have their serviceAccount set to any of the service accounts available in the Job's namespace
8. Admin can allow users (all/roles/specific) to CREATE Checkup CRs
9. User can create a Checkup CR referencing service account through its attribute
10. Kiagnose framework can monitor these CRs and then create Jobs in their respective namespaces, with requested service accounts

Given:
* There is a service account created in a Namespace, thus available to all users with access to the namespace
* A user is given the right to create Checkup CR in the namespace

When:
* The user creates the CR
* Kiagnose sees the CR and creates a Job in turn

Then:
* The content of the checkup starts under the requested service account
* The checkup can do any operation given to the service account
* If the checkup tries to do something out of the scope (e.g. delete another namespace), Kubernetes will prevent it from happening
* The checkup have the same amount of rights, or less, than any users with ability to create Pods in the namespace.

Reviewer: > Hence user can do anything them or any of the service accounts in their namespace was allowed to

This is a hack, and not the main expected way of doing things.
Lets put it aside for now.

> There is a service account created in a Namespace, thus available to all users with access to the namespace

An admin can decide that ServiceAccount listing is not permitted.

Lets assume a user can only do what he was allowed to do by its admin.

Everything else you wrote is correct.

Lets assume the ServiceAccount of the checkup is able to create and delete namespaces.
Lets assume an admin had deployed this ServiceAccount and bound it to the ClusterRole.

Now, a user, which does not have the permissions to create or delete namespace, triggers a checkup which can.
And this collides with the requirement:
>  Checkups need to run with the same or lesser rights as the user which triggered them.

Reviewer: This scenario still holds if you run the checkup as a stand-alone application.

Author: Excellent. But it would match a requirement "Checkups must not be able to gain higher rights than the user which triggered them could.", do you agree?

Reviewer: Checkups cannot gain more privileges than their ServiceAccount permits (unless the can somehow create and bind roles to themselves which will be poor configuration).
There is no association between what the user can do, and what the checkup could do after its Pod was created.
I suggest to drop this requirement because we cannot address it.

Author: Ok

Reviewer: Thank you for the discussion :)

## User requirements

1. Nothing but `kubectl` should be required on the client-side to interact with
   checkups.
2. Kiagnose must not create a service account or bind any roles. It must rely on
   existing Kubernetes autorization mechanisms, and on present RBAC
   configuration.
3. Checkup must be initiated in the namespace it was requested from.
4. If there is a need for a long-running controller, it is delivered through OLM
   and can be installed by the cluster administrator.
5. A project-admin can run a checkup without any prior work done by
   cluster-admin (with the exception described in the requirement 4).
6. As a project owner I would like to automate running several checkups.
   Therefore I need a clear API to pass parameters to a checkup and collect its
   output.
7. As a Vendor I would like to have a clear API that my checkup must adhere to,
   so it is easy to integrate to the framework.

## Out of v1 scope

1. Kiagnose is not required to cleanup of objects it did not create, e.g. objects
   created by checkups.
2. Kiagnose does not need to provide tooling allowing checkups to export
   artifacts.

## Project-admin user stories

 * As a cluster admin,

>    I don't want to be bothered by developers wanting to run a test of their application.

Reviewer: Could you please move this part to a section of its own?
I think more details should be added like:
I am not willing to install CRDs or custom control plane components for checkups controlled by project admins.

Reviewer: *for individual checkups

Reviewer 3: I am not sure if we should explicitly say what a cluster-admin should not be bothered with, as that opens up the option of listing many other things. But this is not that critical to me.

# Way towards v1

This document aims to define acceptance criteria that should guide redesign of
Kiagnose, driving it to v1.

The goal of the v1 release is to provide a solid core of the framework and
stable APIs. The goal is not to provide a feature rich tool.

## Personas

> 1. cluster-admin installing Kiagnose

Reviewer 3: Do we need this now? At the moment, we do not need the cluster-admin intervention.

Author: Removed

2. Vendor writting a checkup

> 3. Cluster user running one or more checkups

Reviewer 3: Should this be a project user?

## User requirements

1. Nothing but `kubectl` should be required on the client-side to interact with
   checkups.
2. Kiagnose must not create a service account or bind any roles. It must rely on
   existing Kubernetes autorization mechanisms, and on present RBAC
   configuration.
3. Checkup must be initiated in the namespace it was requested from.

> 4. If there is a need for a long-running controller, it is delivered through OLM

Reviewer 3: Can we remove it now?

Author: Done

   and can be installed by the cluster administrator.
5. A project-admin can run a checkup without any prior work done by

>    cluster-admin (with the exception described in the requirement 4).

Reviewer 3: Can we remove the exception?

Author: Done

6. As a project owner I would like to automate running several checkups.
   Therefore I need a clear API to pass parameters to a checkup and collect its
   output. Note: To operate over heterogenous set of checkups and expose them as
   a single resource, they need to share the same API group and kind.
7. As a Vendor I would like to have a clear API that my checkup must adhere to,
   so it is easy to integrate to the framework.

## Out of v1 scope

1. Kiagnose is not required to cleanup of objects it did not create, e.g. objects
   created by checkups.
2. Kiagnose does not need to provide tooling allowing checkups to export
   artifacts.

## Project-admin user stories

 * As a cluster admin,
   I don't want to be bothered by developers wanting to run a test of their application.

>  * As a developer (project admin),

Reviewer 3: A "developer" is not a persona here. Can you change it to a project user?

Author: Done

# Way towards v1

This document aims to define acceptance criteria that should guide redesign of
Kiagnose, driving it to v1.

The goal of the v1 release is to provide a solid core of the framework and
stable APIs. The goal is not to provide a feature rich tool.

## Personas

1. Cluster admin
2. Vendor writting a checkup
3. Project admin running one or more checkups

## User requirements

1. Nothing but `kubectl` should be required on the client-side to interact with
   checkups.
2. Kiagnose must not create a service account or bind any roles. It must rely on
   existing Kubernetes autorization mechanisms, and on present RBAC
   configuration.
3. Checkup must be initiated in the namespace it was requested from.
4. A project-admin can run a checkup without any prior work done by

>    cluster-admin.

Reviewer: Please consider moving this paragraph under `## Project-admin user stories`.

Reviewer 3: Currently all are under the same general "user" and it does not affect readability.
I think it is fine as is (although I do not really mind if it is moved).

Reviewer 3: And these are requirements, not user stories.

Reviewer: This specific sentence is indeed a requirement.
Please ignore this comment.

5. As a project owner I would like to automate running several checkups.
   Therefore I need a clear API to pass parameters to a checkup and collect its
   output. Note: To operate over heterogenous set of checkups and expose them as

>    a single resource, they need to share the same API group and kind.

Reviewer: Please consider moving this paragraph under `## Project-admin user stories`.

Reviewer 3: same

6. As a Vendor I would like to have a clear API that my checkup must adhere to,

>    so it is easy to integrate to the framework.

Reviewer: Please consider moving this paragraph under a `vendor user stories` section.

Reviewer 3: same

## Out of v1 scope

1. Kiagnose is not required to cleanup of objects it did not create, e.g. objects
   created by checkups.
2. Kiagnose does not need to provide tooling allowing checkups to export
   artifacts.

## Project-admin user stories

 * As a cluster admin,
   I don't want to be bothered by project admins wanting to run a test of their
   application, that could be executed with their current privileges.
 * As a cluster admin,
   I'm only willing to deal with native Kubernetes resources,

>    I don't want to be bothered with any Kiagnose-specific resources.

Reviewer: These user stories talk about the cluster-admin.
Please consider moving them to a section of their own.

Reviewer 3: I think the "Project-admin" on line 39 should be dropped, making the user as part of the individual story.
